Values and ethics guide managers in responsible
decision making and in exercising due diligence
in their responsibilities and accountabilities.
The Values and Ethics Code for the Public Sector
and the  Directive on Conflict of Interest,
issued under the Policy on People Management,
guide all public servants in their professional duties.
The code and the directive are a condition of
employment, which means that all employees must
read and agree to them in order to be employed
in the public service.
The values and expected behaviours outlined
in the Values and Ethics Code for the Public Sector
are at the foundation of good management and
leadership, and they are a key element in
upholding integrity and respect.
When considering a values and ethics decision,
ask yourself these questions.
Do I have the authority to make this decision?
Have I considered my options?
Have I consulted my resources?
A public servant who acts in a manner that
violates the Values and Ethics Code for
the Public Sector or the Directive on
Conflict of Interest may be subject to disciplinary
measures, up to and including
termination of employment.
In certain circumstances, public servants could
even be charged under Canada’s Criminal Code
for breaches of conduct.
In this section you will learn to
identify key elements involved in values and ethics,
recognize harassment and violence,
recognize the steps in the harassment
and violence complaint process, and
identify acts of wrongdoing as defined by
the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Act.
This section should take you
approximately 30 minutes to complete.
Respect for people is one value that must be
emphasized among all others.
Fostering a safe, healthy work environment,
including protecting employees from
harassment and violence, is a key requirement
of employers (or deputy heads), as outlined in the
Directive on the Prevention and Resolution
of Workplace Harassment and Violence and
the Work Place Harassment and Violence
Prevention Regulations.
As a manager you are in a position of influence
and authority. You have a responsibility to
explain and guide your staff in acting ethically,
be a role model to your team, and
apply a values-and-ethics filter
in executing your responsibilities.
To help you assess whether the behaviour
(an act, comment or display)
constitutes harassment and violence,
ask yourself the following questions.
Did I experience or witness unwelcome
or offensive behaviour?
Did it demean, belittle or cause
personal humiliation or embarrassment?
For a definition of workplace harassment
and violence and a full list of examples,
please consult the web page
Requirements for employers to prevent
harassment and violence
in federally regulated workplaces.
Harassment and violence can be
one severe incident that has a lasting impact
on the individual, or it can be a series
of objectionable actions, conduct or comments
against a person because of, for example,
that person’s race, national or ethnic origin,
religion, age, sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, genetic characteristics, disability
or any of the other prohibited grounds listed in
the Canadian Human Rights Act. In addition,
the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples expands the scope
of discrimination to include culture, identity,
religion, language, health,
education and community.
When assessing a situation, consider the severity
and impropriety of the act, the circumstances
and context of the situation, and whether
the behaviour is prohibited under
the Canadian Human Rights Act.
A formal process is initiated when an employee
files a written complaint with the individual
or unit responsible for managing harassment
and violence complaints.
For more information on the formal process,
please refer to the Work Place Harassment
and Violence Prevention Regulations.
Harassment and violence is serious and
needs to be addressed promptly,
with sensitivity, competence and discretion.
The primary goal is to resolve allegations of
harassment and violence with the least disruption
to the work environment. To accomplish this,
follow the eight steps detailed on this website:
Resolve a workplace harassment and violence
complaint.  The steps include
acknowledging receipt of the complaint
and notifying the employee who is the object
of the complaint , informing the principle party
of the resources available to them, making
every reasonable effort to resolve the occurrence,
and  recording  all occurrences of harassment
and violence that have been reported to you.
During your career in the public service,
you may be required to address conflicts of
interest between your private and professional
activities outside of work and your official
duties and responsibilities.
Compliance with the Policy on People Management
and the Directive on Conflict of Interest
is a condition of employment. The directive
details requirements for public servants to
prevent and deal with any real, apparent or
potential conflict of interest during
their employment and post-employment.
In essence, the directive states that all
public servants must serve the public interest
by taking all possible steps to prevent and resolve,
in favour of the public interest, any real, apparent
or potential conflicts of interest between
their official responsibilities
and their private affairs.
For example, employment outside of the
public service could be seen as a
conflict of interest. So, if an employee informs you
that they are self-employed or are considering
a position outside the federal public service,
it is your responsibility to ask the employee
to review the requirements outlined
in the directive, and  write a report
to inform the deputy head to determine
whether the situation could place the employee
in a real, apparent or potential conflict of interest .
The Public Servants Disclosure Protection Act
(PSDPA) establishes a process for public sector
employees to come forward if they believe
that wrongdoing has occurred or
is about to occur in the workplace.
Wrongdoing is defined under the PSDPA
as any of the following:
breaking laws or regulations,
misusing public funds or assets,
gross mismanagement,
an act or omission that endangers the life,
health and safety of Canadians or the environment,
a serious breach of the public sector
or organizational code of conduct, or
directing or counselling a person
to do any of these things.
The legislation protects public servants’
confidentiality when disclosing suspected
wrongdoing and protects them from
possible reprisals. As a manager, you have
an important role to play in modelling
values-based leadership and informing
your employees of their rights and
options under the PSDPA.
You may encounter situations where
employees disclose wrongdoing to you.
It is your role to receive the disclosure,
inform your organization’s senior officer
for internal disclosure, and protect the identity
of those involved in the disclosure process.
Employees may also choose to approach
the senior officer for internal disclosure  or the
Public Sector Integrity Commissioner directly.
Take what you have learned into real life!
Your organization will have
its own ways of doing things.
Take a time out from the course
to do several things.
Test your knowledge by answering
the following questions.
Select “Submit” when you are done.